Welcome to Lesson 3, NoSQL and MongoDB.
In this lesson, we'll be talking about
non-relational databases also known as NoSQL databases.
We already looked at relational databases where data is
organized into tables containing rows and columns.
The tables adhere to a schema,
a database consists of a set of tables,
and these tables can be related.
The power of relational database lies in the fact that
data can be distributed across multiple tables,
but can be merged together using joints.
Non-relational databases on the other hand,
do not generally organize data as rows and columns.
Depending on the database you choose,
relations might not be possible either.
As the name signifies,
SQL is not the interface to these databases.
NoSQL databases also did not enforce a strict schema definition.
NoSQL databases can be broadly classified into four categories.
First, key-value stores.
This is a hash table with keys and values.
Every item in the database is stored as an attribute name together with its value.
Riak and Redis are good examples of this type.
Next, is document stores.
These databases pair each key with a complex data structure known as a document.
Document can contain many different key value pairs
or key RA pairs or even nested documents.
MongoDB is the most popular of these databases.
Next, column-based stores.
These stores store data together as columns instead of
rows and are optimized for queries over large datasets.
The most popular are Cassandra and HBase.
Finally, graph-based.
A network database that uses edges and nodes to represent and store data.
Neo4J is a good example of this type.
In this lesson, we'll be focusing on MongoDB,
a popular and widely used document-oriented distributed database.
First, you will install and set up MongoDB.
Next, you'll do basic operations on MongoDB documents using the interactive Mongo shell.
Finally, you will learn how to model your data as documents.
This lesson's going to be great.
Good luck and have fun.